---
title: "Sociology's Most Cited Papers by Decade"
date: "2014-11-15"
slug: "top-ten-by-decade"
categories: [Sociology]
---

My colleague [Jim Moody](http://www.soc.duke.edu/~jmoody77/) sent along some interesting data this morning. Using the Web of Science database, he took the most-cited papers in Sociology and produced a Top 10 list for each decade going back to the 1950s. Not a table of which papers were most popular *in* those decades, but a table of which papers are most-cited *from* those decades. So we're looking at the Top 10 most-cited papers that were *published* in the 1950s, 1960s, and so on. (This means that while the eleventh most-cited paper from the 1980s might outscore the fourth most-cited paper from the 1950s in terms of citations, the former does not appear here while the latter does. Note that the 1950s category is really "1950s and before". The universe of citing papers, meanwhile, is all of WoS.

I absolve Jim of any responsibility for the figure or my comments below. Here's a dotplot of the results:

{{% figure src="http://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/cite-dotplot-by-decade-grouped.png" alt="Top 10 from Each Decade" caption="Sociology's Top 10 Most-Cited Papers from Each Decade, based on all-time citations in WoS." %}}

(You can get a [PDF version of this figure](http://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/cite-dotplot-by-decade-grouped.pdf) if you want a closer look.) 

One thing to notice is the rise of articles from the _Annual Review of Sociology_ in the 2000s. Another is the increasing heterogeneity of outlets. Of the top ten papers written in the 1950s or before, eight appear in the *American Sociological Review*, one in the *American Journal of Sociology*, and one in *Social Forces*. (That is SF's only entry in the list, as it happens.) The 1960s are similarly ruled by ASR and AJS. After that, though, the there's more variety. Strikingly, for the 2000s only one of the ten most-cited articles is from ASR and none is from AJS---a complete reversal of the pattern of the '50s and '60s.  You can also see the long shadow of post-war university expansion and "Boomer Sociology". The most-cited work from before 1970 is not nearly as widely cited as the most-cited work from the '70s and '80s, despite having been around longer. The drop-off in the '90s and '00s is to be expected as those papers are younger.

Substantively, I think you can see the importance of articles whose
main contribution is either a methodological technique or a
theoretical idea. Correspondingly, there are fewer papers where a
specific empirical finding is the main contribution. If you want to
hang in there as one of the most-remembered papers from your decade,
give people a good idea to work with or a powerful tool to use. Of
course, it's also true that people tend to have a lot of unread books
in the house and unused drill attachments in the garage.

It's tempting to connect these two features of the lists. To
speculate: ASR and AJS remain amongst the journals with the very
highest impact factors in the discipline, and publishing in them has
become more important than ever to people's careers. Yet the
most-cited papers of the last two decades appeared elsewhere. These
journals nominally demand the papers they publish exemplify very high
standards in methods and ideally also innovate theoretically, along
with making an empirical contribution to knowledge. That, together
with a more competitive and professionalized labor market, produces
very high-quality papers. But it also makes these journals less likely
than in the past to publish purely technical or purely theoretical
pieces. Outlets like *Sociological Methods and Research* and
*Sociological Methodology* publish articles that might in the past
have appeared in more general journals. More specialized journals like
*Theory and Society* or *Gender and Society* are more likely than
before to be home to more theory-heavy pieces that might once have
gotten in at ASR or AJS but are now rejected. At the same
time---perhaps because the state of theory in the field is more
confused than that of methods---theory is also partially displaced by
ARS papers that make an argument for some idea or approach, but under
the shield of a topical empirical literature review. In a relatively fragmented field, it's also easier for methodological papers to be more widely cited across a range of substantive areas than it is for a theory paper to do the same.

One would need rather more data than the figure above to confirm that
sort of conjecture, but I think it's at least plausible.




